NOTES 61

49. et z etiam. — edepol = e-de(m)-p0l, like e-qui(d)-dem, pol
being abridgcd from Pollux.

50. ualen = ualesne. — rectius: pretty well.

51. plus: better.

52. hercle: its use is limited to men.

53. mali: partitive genitive with quid. Jesting at thc expense
of shrcwish wives is a frequent source of amusement in the New
Comcdy.

54. quod mihi est idem: the same os sor myself.

56. bene hercle nuntias: eycul, tlzat's fine news!

57. ut uitae tuae superstes suppetat: that she may 9⁰ so sar as
to outliw you. The expression is somewhat redundant.

58. dum: if only, with a subjunctive of proviso. For the scan-
sion of (Ιιῖηιριιῖᾶειη, sec. Introduction, §20

59. uin commutemus: u·oul‹l you have us make on exchanqe 2³
commutemus is a deliberative subjunctive in parataxis with uin
(z uisne).

60. faxo haud tantillum, etcs: you wouldn't cheat me, I 'll war-
rant, this little bit. The words are accompanied with a gesture.
The form faxo (sac-so) is really an aorist subjunctive with
future force, ·The word is used parenthetically and does not
control the subjunctive dederis, which is really the apodosis to
si commutauerz‘mus, understood. The genitive uerborum depends
on tantillum, and dare uerba, properly ‘¹ to give words, but not
deeds,'’ is common in the sense of ‘⁴ to cheat.’'

61. namque enim: sor, to be sure ‚· enim in asseverative sense.
For the scansion enim tu, see Introduction, ᾗ 14. — me inpruden-
tem obrepseris: you would steal upon me unawares. The accusative
with obrepere is archaic.

62. ne: truly,· always followed by a pronoun. , The word is to
be compared to νή, vaZ.—faxo: again parenthetic; cf. 60.—
haud nescias: you would know well.

63. habeas ut nanctu's: zie. keep what you have; nanctu’s=
nanctus es. The jussive subjunctive is very common in Plautus
and has a wider range than in later Latin.

65. proinde ut: just as. For the scansion of proinde, see In-
troduction, §26

66. hoe: archaic form of huc.

